#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
COMP 412: Open Source Programming Project Proposal
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
by Jay Wengrow, Chris Abplanalp & David Treering
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
Due June 6, 2011  
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Abstract 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One potentially excellent resouce for discovering new and exciting open
 source projects created using Ruby on Rails is a website called Opensourcerails.
com.
 While the site is fully functional as is, it could be greatly improved
 upon in several ways.
 It currently lacks unit and integration tests, which naturally discourages
 other developers to contribute to the project for fear that their additions
 may break existing code.
 It also is built using Rails version 2, while the latest version, Rails
 3, has been around for more than one year now and has made considerable
 advances.
 Opensourcerails.com also does not implement certain filter functionalities
 which makes it easy for a user to quickly discover projects interesting
 to him or her.
 Lastly, the visual design could be upgraded to make the website seem more
 current and professional, thereby encouraging more users to utilize it.
 Our proposal is to make the above stated changes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Executive Summary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Intellectual Merit
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Since the popularization of the Internet, the web has become a primary resource
 in the sharing of free and open source software.
 To get more developers to work on certain open source projects, there have
 been various attempts at creating useful websites that showcase many different
 open source projects available for further development and use.
 There have been fewer websites that target specific evelopment languages
 or platforms.
 There seems to be only one website devoted to showcasing open source projects
 developed using the Ruby on Rails web framework.
 This site has been implemented and hosted by a Rails developer named Jacques
 Crocker, and can be found at Opensourcerails.com.
 This web application collects many Ruby on Rails projects and lets the
 user search or browse them to either use them or further develop them.
 There seems to have been no serious attempt, however, at upgrading this
 site in recent years, and traffic to this site seems to have diminished.
 This is unfortunate, since Opensourcerails.com may be the only website that
 showcases Rails projects in this way.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Broader Impact
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The effect we are trying to leave on society is to have a functional way
 to share Ruby on Rails applications that will allow users to quickly find
 and understand an application to use or develop further.
 This is an application of Loyola’s mission in that it is helping individuals
 put forth their knowledge to service the community but also allow individuals
 to further their knowledge by expanding the projects that have already
 been developed.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Transformative Potential
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This project may have a significant impact on society, because it is an
 excellent way to further the Open Source Movement.
 By making this website more palatable from a development perspective, even
 more developers may use this application to find relevant projects that
 need further development.
 It also is an excellent resource for non-developers to simply find great
 software that is free to use.
 Exposing the Ruby on Rails framework and applications to a wider audience
 will increase the utility of this framework for developers everywhere.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Problem Statement and Related Work 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The existing website, Opensourcerails.com, is a great resource, but is languishin
g and not being widely used or improved upon.
 As a gallery of free and open source software built using the Ruby on Rails
 framework, this site should be the best place to find exciting, new open
 source applications and uses of Rails.
 However, as evidenced by the change logs and a brief review of the site,
 this FOSS project has not been contributed to in more than two years.
 The upgrade to the most current version of the Rails framework has not
 yet been attempted.
 In addition, there are no unit tests for developers who might be inclined
 to contribute to this project.
 In fact, there have been comments posted to the website asking when the
 site will be upgraded to the latest version of Rails so people could be
 more involved.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Motivation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Opensourcerails.org would be a more interesting and capable service if it
 had some added functionality besides simply listing FOSS Rails projects.
 The ability to sort and filter (e.g.
 by name, date or topic of the Rails projects) would make the site much
 more useful for those trying to find particular functionality in an existing
 project.
 Tests are a critical way for developers who contribute to a FOSS project
 to know if they are producing something that works with existing code,
 or if their manipulations or edits have broken something.
 By not having a test suite available, developers may be discouraged from
 contributing to opensourcerails.org.
 Research shows that one of the key obstacles for developers in contributing
 to open source software is the lack of adequate documentation (Shibuya
 & Tamai, 2009).
 Good integration tests can serve as an important form of documentation,
 as they spell out specifically what the application code must accomplish.
 By creating a suite of unit tests for the website, we hope to make the
 project more attractive to other Rails developers as well.
 While the differences between the most recent version of Rails, Rails 2,
 and the current version, Rails 3, are not drastic, a website that showcases
 well done Rails web applications should itself be at the forefront of the
 technology it professes to support.
 Also, developers will be more inclined to build upon a site that utilizes
 the latest technology, especially as Rails 3 is considerably easier to
 use.
 We will perform the necessary upgrades from Rails 2 to Rails 3 for the
 entire site.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Milestones and Deliverables 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As stated above, the milestones we are trying to reach for this project
 are: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
1) Upgrade from Rails 2 to Rails 3: Jay will be primary on this task.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
2) Create test suite with unit tests: David will be primary on this task.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
3) Add more advanced sort/filter features: All will work on this task.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
4) Upgrade website design layout: Chris will be primary on this task.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Timeline, Technical Approach, and Project Management 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
One major obstacle we will face is the time available to develop this project.
 We have about two weeks to rebuild the application and revitalize its design.
 Week one will include the creation of the website’s structure via semantic
 HTML for all the pages plus the identifying of all the website’s current
 functionality that we must replicate.
 Week two will involve the writing of the integration tests, as we will
 write the tests prior to the actual development, in accordance with the
 Agile practice of Test Driven Development.
 While TDD may increase the time needed to complete a project, research
 shows that it significantly improves the quality of the software (Bhat
 & Nagappan, 2006).
 Week three will aim to cause all the integration tests to pass by building
 the actual application using the Ruby on Rails framework.
 This will include several functionalities that are not yet existent in
 the currently operating website.
 The new design can be created in parallel during week two, and will be
 complete by the end of the project.
 The aesthetics of web design becomes important for a users return/accessibility
 (Mbipom, 2009).
 The single advantage to the tight deadline is that we can use the 30 day
 trial of Basecamp as our project management system.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Evaluation of Outcome 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
As our project includes the creation of a comprehensive test suite for every
 aspect of the website’s functionality, the primary means of evaluating
 the project’s success is to have all the tests pass.
 In addition, we will seek review from our peers to determine if the website
 is indeed easy to use and a project that they may be inclined to help contribut
e towards.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Dissemination Plan 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We are developing our application off a fork from an existing project and
 will submit a “Pull” request to the original author to incorporate our
 changes for distribution via GitHub.
 The target audience we are focusing on are the whole web community interested
 in Free and Open Source Ruby on Rails application.
 We hope to make the experience about learning or developing applications
 easier than the current web application.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Citations 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Thirumalesh Bhat and Nachiappan Nagappan.
 2006.
 Evaluating the efficacy of test-driven development: industrial case studies.
 In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM/IEEE international symposium on Empirical
 software engineering (ISESE '06).
 ACM, New York, NY, USA, 356-363.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Michael Hartl.
 2010.
 Ruby on Rails 3 Tutorial: Learn Rails by Example (1st ed.).
 Addison-Wesley Professional.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Bianca Shibuya and Tetsuo Tamai.
 2009.
 Understanding the process of participating in open source communities.
 In Proceedings of the 2009 ICSE Workshop on Emerging Trends in Free/Libre/Open
 Source Software Research and Development (FLOSS '09).
 IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 1-6.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Grace Mbipom.
 2009.
 Good visual aesthetics equals good web accessibility.
 SIGACCESS Access.
 Comput.
 93 (January 2009), 75-83.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
